---
title: Compilation
description: How we get from C program to machine code
lang: en-US
tags: c, programming, compilation, machine code
---

# Compilation

Our source files go through the following tools that act on them:

1. Preprocessor
2. Compiler
3. Assembler
4. Linker

Let's explain the process based on a simple solution:

:::: tabs
 
::: tab main.cpp
```cpp
#include "source.hpp"

int main() {
    add(2,3);
    return 0;
}
```
:::
 
 
::: tab add.cpp
```cpp
int add(int a, int b) {
    return a + b;
}
```
:::

::: tab add.hpp
```cpp
int add(int a, int b);
```
:::

::::

We can compile the app with:

```sh
g++ main.cpp add.cpp

# or to change the binary name
g++ main.cpp add.cpp -o program
```

The result is an executable file `a.out`.

## Header Files

First, it's good to understand the purpose of the header files. These files
include declarations of various entities (like functions or global variables).
The actual implementations (defintitions) of these functions go into the
`.cpp`/`.c` files (although, the header files also might contain definitions,
it's not illegal). The implementation might change over time, which requires
recompilation. The header files are less likely to change, since they only
contain the signatures of functions. In other files, we're not directly relying
on the `.cpp`/`.c` files. Instead, we're relying on the header files.

Header files are then like interfaces that are expected to not change. We are
supposed to rely on them instead of on the actual implementations.

In our programs, we cannot refer to symbols that are not defined/declared. The
symbol can be defined in the current file, or in some other file that is
included into the current files. Additionally, a given entity can only be
defined once. It's called the **One Definition Rule** in the C++ Standard.

## Preprocessor

The first step when compiling our program is the **Preprocessing**. It handles
all the lines that start with the `#` (e.g., `#include` or `#if`, macros
substitution).

To get the output of the preprocessor, we can execute:

```sh
gcc++ -E main.cpp
```

Here's what we get on stdout:

```cpp
# 1 "main.cpp"
# 1 "<built-in>"
# 1 "<command-line>"
# 1 "/usr/include/stdc-predef.h" 1 3 4
# 1 "<command-line>" 2
# 1 "main.cpp"
# 1 "source.hpp" 1
int add(int a, int b);
# 2 "main.cpp" 2

int main() {
 add(2,3);
 return 0;
}
```

If we included some common library like *iostream*, our file would become huge
after the preprocessing stage.

What preprocessor did in this case was just including the content of `add.hpp`
directly into `main.cpp`.

The files that preprocessor creates have the `.i` extension. They are sometimes
called **Translation Units**. These files are not generated by default, we
rarely need them.

## Compiler

The result of preprocessing is handed over to the **Compiler**. Compiler
analyzes the text of the code and builds a tree (like AST - Abstract Syntax
Tree).

We can dump out AST with:

```sh
g++ -fdump-tree-all-graph -g main.cpp add.cpp
```

The resulting `.dot` files can be viewed.

---

The next step of the compilation is the generation of the Assemby code.
Here' how we can generate Assembly code:

```sh
g++ -S add.cpp
```

Here's the resulting `add.s` file:

```asm
	.arch armv8-a
	.file	"add.cpp"
	.text
	.align	2
	.global	_Z3addii
	.type	_Z3addii, %function
_Z3addii:
.LFB0:
	.cfi_startproc
	sub	sp, sp, #16
	.cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
	str	w0, [sp, 12]
	str	w1, [sp, 8]
	ldr	w1, [sp, 12]
	ldr	w0, [sp, 8]
	add	w0, w1, w0
	add	sp, sp, 16
	.cfi_def_cfa_offset 0
	ret
	.cfi_endproc
.LFE0:
	.size	_Z3addii, .-_Z3addii
	.ident	"GCC: (Ubuntu 9.4.0-1ubuntu1~20.04.1) 9.4.0"
	.section	.note.GNU-stack,"",@progbits
```

::: tip
This code was generated on an ARM64 machine.
:::

## Assembler

We can generate object files from our source code with:

```sh
g++ -c main.c
g++ -c add.c
```

It will produce `main.o` and `add.o` files. These are blobs of machine code.
They need to be joined together (via the Linker) in a proper way to have the
final executable.

We can explore what's inside of the `.o` files with the **objdump** command:

```sh
objdump -t add.o
```

The result is:

```
add.o:     file format elf64-littleaarch64

SYMBOL TABLE:
0000000000000000 l    df *ABS*	0000000000000000 add.cpp
0000000000000000 l    d  .text	0000000000000000 .text
0000000000000000 l    d  .data	0000000000000000 .data
0000000000000000 l    d  .bss	0000000000000000 .bss
0000000000000000 l    d  .note.GNU-stack	0000000000000000 .note.GNU-stack
0000000000000000 l    d  .eh_frame	0000000000000000 .eh_frame
0000000000000000 l    d  .comment	0000000000000000 .comment
0000000000000000 g     F .text	0000000000000020 _Z3addii
```

The last line lists our function `add`.

In general, the `.o` files contain:

- data - the actual machine instructions, parts of our program. We will find
  there references to entities defined in other translation units, these are
  placeholders that will be filled by the Linker.
- metadata - information needed by Linker to combine the object files into an
  actual executable. An example is the "link" between names of symbols and their
  addresses in memory.

## Linker

Here's how to link the object files into an executable:

```sh
g++ main.o source.o -o program # results in a.out
```

Linker "glues" together the `.o` files. It also can link dynamic libraries
(`.so` files) that may come form the "outside" of our solution (like some
standard libraries). An example of it could be "iostream".

::: tip soname
Here's some information about [soname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soname)
:::

```cpp
#include "add.hpp"
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << add(2,3) << std::endl;;
    return 0;
}
```

In this program, I'm including "iostream" to make use of the `cout` function.

After compilation, we can have a look at the dynamic libraries being linked to
our program:

```sh
ldd a.out
```

The result is:

```
linux-vdso.so.1 (0x0000ffff8ff98000)
libstdc++.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6 (0x0000ffff8fd71000)
libc.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x0000ffff8fbfe000)
libm.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libm.so.6 (0x0000ffff8fb54000)
/lib/ld-linux-aarch64.so.1 (0x0000ffff8ff68000)
libgcc_s.so.1 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libgcc_s.so.1 (0x0000ffff8fb30000)
```

::: Other OSs
The `.so` files are Linux dynamic libraries. Windows uses `.dll`, and macOS uses
`.dylib`.
:::

When compiling programs, we can specify explicitly the dynamic libraries that we
want to link, with the `-l` flag in g++.